doc: safety: Requirment repo and guidelines (#71953)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/safety/safety_requirements.rst

.. _safety_requirements:

Safety Requirements
###################

Introduction
************
The safety committee drive the effort to gather requirements to reflect the **actual** state of the
implementation in requirements form, because of the route 3s approach of the projects safety
effort. It is **NOT** the intention to create a new set of requirements to add them into the project
to request new features.

The requirements are gathered in the separate repository:
`Requirement repository
<https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/reqmgmt>`__

Guidelines
**********
Following are the guidelines for the requirements repository and what the safety committee
expects when new requirements are added to the repository

Scope
=====
The scope of the requirements are the **KERNEL** functionality.

Consistency:
============
Consistency across all requirements. The language and choice of words shall be consistent.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See Syntax section below.

```

Levels of requirements in the repository:
=========================================
* System Requirements:

  System requirements describe the behaviour of the Zephyr RTOS (= the system here).
  They describe the functionality of the Zephyr RTOS of a very high level point of view,
  without going into details of the functionality itself.

>   The target of the system requirements is to get an overview of the included features of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The target of the system requirements is to get an overview of the currently implemented features of
```

* Non-Functional

Requirement title convention:
=============================
Use short and terse requirement titles.

Pull Request requirement repository:

* Adhere to the :ref:`contribute_to_zephyr` of the Zephyr Project.

  * As long as they are applicable to the requirements repository.

* Avoid creating larger commits that contain both trivial and non-trivial changes.

* Avoid moving and changing requirements in the same commit.

Characteristics of a good requirement:
======================================
* Unambiguous
* Testable (verifiable)
* Clear (concise, terse, simple, precise)
* Correct
* Understandable
* Feasible (realistic, possible)
* Independent
* Atomic
* Necessary
* Implementation-free (abstract)

Characteristics of a set of requirements:
=========================================
* Complete
* Consistent
* Non redundant

.. note::
   If you want to contribute to the requirements effort but don't know how to write requirements
   or if you are new to writing requirements, we recommend to look into the
   `EARS
   <https://alistairmavin.com/ears/>`__ Syntax for writing requirements.
   But we also accept contributions in other formats as long as the characteristics

>    of a requirement from above are met.

Reviewer: Elevate note to a section:

Syntax 
====================
* Use of a recognized Requirements Syntax is recommended.
*  `EARS <https://alistairmavin.com/ears/>` is a good reference. 
    Particularly if you are unfamiliar with requirements writing.
* Other formats accepted as long as the characteristics
   of a requirement from above are met.

~~.. note::
   If you want to contribute to the requirements effort but don't know how to write requirements
   or if you are new to writing requirements, we recommend to look into the
   `EARS
   <https://alistairmavin.com/ears/>`__ Syntax for writing requirements.
   But we also accept contributions in other formats as long as the characteristics
   of a requirement from above are met.~~

Reviewer: I could not figure out how to replace multiple lines.

Author: > I could not figure out how to replace multiple lines.

no problem I got your point here.

expects when new requirements are added to the repository

Scope
=====
The scope of the requirements are the **KERNEL** functionality.

Consistency:
============
Consistency across all requirements. The language and choice of words shall be consistent.

Levels of requirements in the repository:
=========================================
* System Requirements:

  System requirements describe the behaviour of the Zephyr RTOS (= the system here).
  They describe the functionality of the Zephyr RTOS of a very high level point of view,
  without going into details of the functionality itself.
  The target of the system requirements is to get an overview of the currently implemented features
  of the Zephyr RTOS.
  In other words a person writing these requirements usually has some knowledge of the Zephyr RTOS
  Project as the requirements are specific to an RTOS.

* Software Requirements:

  Software requirements refine the requirements of the system level at a more granular level so
  that each requirement can be tested.
  These requirements define the specific actions the feature shall be able to execute and the
  behavior of the feature.

> Requirement UID Handling:

Author: I used the Language of strictDoc here and there it is documented as UID and also the Field in the req. files are named UID I would prefer to leave it like this.

=========================
For the requirements management the tool `strictDoc
<https://strictdoc.readthedocs.io/en/stable/>`__
is used, therefore the UID handling shall be handled by the tool and this can be achived by Following
handling:

#. Don't add a requirement UID filed for new requirements
#. After finishing work on the new Requirements execute strictDoc manage auto-uid

> #. Add linking of the requirements with the new distributed UIDs

Reviewer: I recall the discussion on how to manage UIDs and do not recall the details.
Is there a reference in the StrictDoc "Users Guide" covering this?  I hope. 
Is there a StrictDoc "Users Guide"?

After doing this the requirements are ready and a pull request can be created.
The CI in the PR will check if the requirements UIDs are valid or if there are duplicates in it.
If there are duplicates in the PR these need to be resolved by rebasing and re execute
the steps above.

Requirement Types:
==================
* Functional
* Non-Functional

Requirement title convention:
=============================
Use short and terse requirement titles.

Pull Request requirement repository:
====================================

* Adhere to the :ref:`contribute_to_zephyr` of the Zephyr Project.

  * As long as they are applicable to the requirements repository.

* Avoid creating larger commits that contain both trivial and non-trivial changes.

> * Avoid moving and changing requirements in the same commit.

Author: IMHO: I wouldn't recommend doing this, because in a natural workflow you will put in a set of requirements and maybe requirements which depend on each other as well. Therefore the reviewer needs to switch always between the commits to get the context of the requirements.

Characteristics of a good requirement:
======================================
* Unambiguous
* Testable (verifiable)
* Clear (concise, terse, simple, precise)
* Correct
* Understandable
* Feasible (realistic, possible)
* Independent
* Atomic
* Necessary

> * Implementation-free (abstract)

Reviewer: I would prefer "Free of solution-domain specific terms and constructs."

I find that this is a hard separation to define, requires more than a few words, and is still open to interpretation.
An example is using the term "count" when describing the requirements of a Counting Semaphore.
The term "count" can be considered abstract as long as the requirement does not imply that it is a variable or is manipulated in any way.

"Count" is a term that could be used in the implementation.
Arithmetic operations are constructs that could be used in the implementations.

On The Other Hand...
Let's try to avoid taking the guidelines to pathological extremes.

Characteristics of a set of requirements:
=========================================
* Complete
* Consistent
* Non redundant

Syntax:
=======
* Use of a recognized Requirements Syntax is recommended.
* `EARS
  <https://alistairmavin.com/ears/>`__ is a good reference.
  Particularly if you are unfamiliar with requirements writing.
* Other formats accepted as long as the characteristics

>   of a requirement from above are met.

Reviewer: We came close enough to offer it as a guideline.

>   of a requirement from above are met.

Author: We could add a section for more information, but I would prefer to add it afterwards and not with the first shot of the guideline to move forward and get a first draft in which we can always improve on.

.. _safety_requirements:

Safety Requirements
###################

Introduction
************
The safety committee drive the effort to gather requirements to reflect the **actual** state of the
implementation in requirements form, because of the route 3s approach of the projects safety
effort. It is **NOT** the intention to create a new set of requirements to add them into the project
to request new features.

The requirements are gathered in the separate repository:
`Requirement repository
<https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/reqmgmt>`__

Guidelines
**********
Following are the guidelines for the requirements repository and what the safety committee
expects when requirements are added to the repository

Scope
=====
The scope of the requirements are the **KERNEL** functionalities.

Consistency
===========
Consistency across all requirements. The language and choice of words shall be consistent.
(See: `Syntax`_)

Levels of requirements in the repository
========================================

> * System Requirements:
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
System Requirements
```

  System requirements describe the behaviour of the Zephyr RTOS (= the system here).
  They describe the functionality of the Zephyr RTOS of a very high level point of view,
  without going into details of the functionality itself.
  The target of the system requirements is to get an overview of the currently implemented features
  of the Zephyr RTOS.
  In other words a person writing these requirements usually has some knowledge of the Zephyr RTOS
  Project as the requirements are specific to an RTOS.

> * Software Requirements:
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Software Requirements
```

>   Software requirements refine the requirements of the system level at a more granular level so

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Software requirements refine the system-level requirements to a more granular level so
```

  that each requirement can be tested.
  These requirements define the specific actions the feature shall be able to execute and the
  behavior of the feature.

Requirement UID (Unique identifier) Handling
============================================

> For the requirements management the tool `strictDoc
> <https://strictdoc.readthedocs.io/en/stable/>`__
> is used, therefore the UID (Unique identifier) handling shall be handled by the tool and this can be achived by Following
> handling:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The tool used to manage requirements, strictDoc <https://strictdoc.readthedocs.io/en/stable/>_, is
responsible for handling the Unique Identifier (UID) associated with each requirement. To manage
UIDs, follow these steps:```
```

Author: Is it intended to add the ``` after steps? This change cause doc build errors.

Reviewer 2: Definitely not intended, sorry!

> #. Don't add a requirement UID filed for new requirements

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. Don't fill in the requirement UID when creating new requirements
```

Author: In this case the complete filed don't need to be added for a requirement,

> #. After finishing work on the new Requirements execute: **strictDoc manage auto-uid**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. After completing work on the new requirements, execute: ``strictDoc manage auto-uid``
```

> #. Establish links between the requirements with the new distributed UIDs if needed

Reviewer 2: i think you meant "attributed"?

```suggestion
#. Establish links between the requirements with the new attributed UIDs if needed
```

> After doing this the requirements are ready and a pull request can be created.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After doing this, the requirements are ready and a pull request can be created.
```

The CI in the PR will check if the requirements UIDs are valid or if there are duplicates in it.

> If there are duplicates in the PR these need to be resolved by rebasing and re execute
> the steps above.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If there are duplicates in the PR, these need to be resolved by rebasing and re-executing
the steps above.
```

Requirement Types
=================
* Functional
* Non-Functional

Requirement title convention
============================
Use short and terse requirement titles.

Pull Request requirement repository
===================================

> * Adhere to the :ref:`contribute_to_zephyr` of the Zephyr Project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Adhere to the :ref:`contribute_guidelines` of the Zephyr Project.
```

  * As long as they are applicable to the requirements repository.

> * Avoid creating larger commits that contain both trivial and non-trivial changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Avoid creating large commits that contain both trivial and non-trivial changes.
```

* Avoid moving and changing requirements in the same commit.

Characteristics of a good requirement
=====================================
* Unambiguous
* Verifiable (e.g. testable for functional requirements)

> * Clear (concise, terse, simple, precise)

Reviewer 2: not a native speaker but I think "terse" is negatively connoted (i.e. means "abrupt")
you might want to switch to using "succinct" in your PR (there's 2 other occurences of the word)

Author: not a native speaker as well but the term terse is often used in requirements literature but will change it to concise

* Correct
* Understandable
* Feasible (realistic, possible)
* Independent
* Atomic
* Necessary
* Implementation-free (abstract)

Characteristics of a set of requirements
========================================
* Complete
* Consistent
* Non redundant

Syntax
======
* Use of a recognized Requirements Syntax is recommended.
* `EARS
  <https://alistairmavin.com/ears/>`__ is a good reference.
  Particularly if you are unfamiliar with requirements writing.

> * Other formats accepted as long as the characteristics

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Other formats are accepted as long as the characteristics
```

> * Other formats accepted as long as the characteristics

Reviewer 2: please check that you're using consistent line wrapping -- this one seems wrapping very aggressively :)

Author: True :)

> * Other formats accepted as long as the characteristics

Reviewer 2: make these two bullet points sub-bullet points of "Use of a recognized..."

.. _safety_requirements:

Safety Requirements
###################

Introduction
************
The safety committee drive the effort to gather requirements to reflect the **actual** state of the
implementation in requirements form, because of the route 3s approach of the projects safety
effort. It is **NOT** the intention to create a new set of requirements to add them into the project
to request new features.

The requirements are gathered in the separate repository:
`Requirement repository
<https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/reqmgmt>`__

Guidelines
**********
Following are the guidelines for the requirements repository and what the safety committee
expects when new requirements are added to the repository

Scope
=====
The scope of the requirements are the **KERNEL** functionality.

Consistency:
============
Consistency across all requirements. The language and choice of words shall be consistent.

Levels of requirements in the repository:
=========================================
* System Requirements

> .. note::

Reviewer 3: why do you need the note here? drop it, should be just a normal paragraph

   System requirements describe the behaviour of the Zephyr RTOS (= the system here).
   They describe the functionality of the Zephyr RTOS of a very high level point of view,
   without going into details of the functionality itself.
   The target of the system requirements is to get an overview of the included features of
   the Zephyr RTOS.
   In other words a person writing these requirements usually has some knowledge of the Zephyr RTOS
   Project as the requirements are specific to an RTOS.

* Software Requirements

> .. note::

Reviewer 3: ditto
